

	T3X/0 - A NEW T3X COMPILER

	Nils M Holm, 2022, 2023, 2024
	Public domain / 0BSD license

	T3X is a family of small, portable, procedural, block-structured,
	recursive, and almost typeless programming languages. The T3X
	syntax is similar to Pascal, its semantics resembles BCPL's.

	T3X/0 is the latest member of the T3X family. Its design is
	based on the experience made with its predecessors. It is
	simpler than the full (Release 7) language, but more complete
	than the minimalistic T3X9 branch.

	The compiler presented here is a single-stage two-pass compiler
	that is aimed to be ported quickly to new platforms, typically
	by just writing a new machine description file. The compiler
	can run on systems as minimal as CP/M on a Z80 CPU and easily
	fits in a tiny model DOS executable. It self-compiles in ten
	minutes on a 4MHz CP/M system -- and in the blink of an eye on
	a modern Unix system.


	CURRENTLY SUPPORTED PLATFORMS

	Operating System   CPU    Output format       Requires
	Generic Unix       VM     Tcode/0             TCVM
	Generic Unix       386    assembly language   C compiler
	FreeBSD            386    assembly language   assembler, loader
	PCDOS 2.0          VM     Tcode/0             TCVM
	PCDOS 2.0          8086   COM                 -
	CP/M 2.2           Z80    COM                 46K bytes TPA

	The compiler can operate natively or as a cross-compiler. Almost
	all combinations are supported: for example, you can cross-
	compile on CP/M for the TCVM, on the TVCM for Unix, on Unix for
	DOS, and on DOS for CP/M. Or on CP/M for DOS, etc. The only
	combinations that are not possible are cross-compilation to
	Unix on CP/M or DOS, because the source code emitter is too
	large.

	----------------------------------------------------------------
	                             NOTE
	----------------------------------------------------------------
	When compilation is aborted and re-compilation fails, this is
	usually due to the wrong code generator being linked in place.
	In this case the following line should bring the code back to
	a useful state:

	    make clean; make reset; make


	QUICK BUILD

	To build and test the T3X/0 compiler, just run

	    make triple test

	This will build the compiler and run the triple test and the
	test suite. This step should print "Looks good!" at the end.


	QUICK USAGE

	After building the compiler successfully, you can compile
	programs by typing

	    ./tcvm txtrn program

	This will compile "program.t" to "program.tc". You can then
	run the program by typing

	    ./tvcm program

	You can also specify an output file name, e.g.:

	    ./tcvm programs/apfel test

	which will compile "programs/apfel.t" and place the binary in
	the file "test.tc" in the local directory.


	INSTALLATION (UNIX)

	First edit the T3XDIR and BINDIR variables in Makefile. T3XDIR
	is where the T3X binary tree will be installed and BINDIR is
	where the "tx0" compiler driver will go.

	Also edit T3XDIR in bin/tx0.sh.

	If you are running a system that supports native code generation
	(basically 386-based Unix and x86-64-based Unix in 32-bit mode),
	run

	    make install-native

	If you are running a different system (or if the above fails),
	you may still install Tcode binaries of the compiler, They will
	offer the same functionality as the native compiler, but run at
	reduced speed. To install the Tcode binaries, run

	    make install-tcode


	INSTALLATION (CP/M AND DOS)

	If you are running DOS or CP/M, you can just install the
	pre-compiled binaries from the "bin" directory.

	To install the compiler on CP/M, copy the file "bin/tx-cpm.com"
	to TX0.COM on your CP/M disk. Then convert the file
	"targets/txcpmz80.t" to CP/M text file format and install it as
	T3X.T on your CP/M disk. The program "programs/cpmfile.t" can be
	used to convert the file on Unix:

	    tcvm txtrn programs/cpmfile cpmfile
	    tcvm cpmfile targets/txcpmz80.t t3x-cpm.t

	To install the compiler on DOS, copy the file "bin/tx-dos.com"
	to TX0.COM on your DOS disk and install "targets/txdos86c.t" as
	T3X.T. Conversion to DOS text file format is optional (it can
	be done with the program "programs/dosfile.t").

	You may also copy the library files in the library/ directory to
	your DOS or CP/M system. Note that there are multiple versions
	of the CONSOLE module, one for every supported system. Only one
	of the files must be installed as CONSOLE.T.

	The location of the library files depends on the "modpath"
	setting of your compiler configuration. A simple solution is
	to put the compiler binaries and the library files in the same
	directory (or a subdirectory called "library"). Files can then
	be compiled from within the directory where the compiler resides.

	Library files must be converted to CP/M text format on CP/M.


	COMPILER USAGE

	This requires either the Tcode or native code binaries to be
	installed on your system. See INSTALLATION, above.

	The T3X/0 compiler driver is called TX0. When just a program
	file name is passed to it, it will compile it to an executable
	program, e.g.

	    tx0 hello

	will compile the file "hello.t" and produce an executable file.
	When an output file name is also given, the resulting executable
	will be placed in that file. E.g.

	   tx0 foo bar

	will compile "foo.t" to an executable named "bar". The executable
	may or may not have a suffix, depending on the type of the
	generated file. Note that the compiler will generate suffixes
	itself, so running

	    tx0 hello.t # WRONG

	will not work. The name of the executable file depends on the
	selected target. Tcode files will have a ".tc" suffix, Unix
	executables will not have any suffix at all, and DOS and CP/M
	executables will have a ".com" suffix.

	The default target will be Tcode when only Tcode binaries are
	installed on your system and Unix executables when native code
	binaries are installed on a Unix system.

	A different target can be specified using the -t option. For
	example,

	   tx0 -t cpm hello

	will generate a CP/M executable named "hello.com".

	The targets "tcvm", "dos", and "cpm" are available in both
	native and Tcode installations. Unix installations add the
	"unix" target. The default is "tcvm" in Tcode installations
	and "unix" in Unix installations.

	In native code installations, specifying the -b flag will use
	the Tcode compiler instead of the native compiler.

	When "/V" is specified as an output file name, the compiler will
	print the name of each procedure it compiles. The name of the
	output file will be the default, i.e. the name of the input file
	with its suffix removed and an executable suffix attached, if
	any.


	BUILDING CROSS COMPILERS

	The "bin/build.sh" script can be used to build all T3X/0 cross
	compilers automatically. Just run

	    bin/build.sh host target

	to generate a compiler that will run on the given host and
	generate code for the given target. There is a total of 14
	different compilers that can be built from the code:

	Target --> TCVM        CP/M        DOS        Unix(*)
	Host
	----
	TCVM       txtrn.tc    tx-cpm.tc   tx-dos.tc  tx-unix.tc
	           txtcvm.t    txcpmz80.t  txdos86c.t txunx386.t

	CP/M       tx-tcvm.com tx-cpm.com  tx-dos.com (**)
	           txtcvm.t    txcpmz80.t  txdos86c.t

	DOS        tx-tcvm.com tx-cpm.com  tx-dos.com (**)
	           txtcvm.t    txcpmz80.t  txdos86c.t

	Unix(*)    tx-tcvm     tx-cpm      tx-dos     tx-unix
	           txtcvm.t    txcpmz80.t  txdos86c.t txunx386.t

	 (*) There is an alternative backend for FreeBSD. See below.
	(**) These compilers cannot be built, because they would be
	     too large.

	For example,

	    bin/build.sh cpm dos

	will generate an executable named "tx-dos.com" that will run
	on CP/M and generate code for DOS. In order to work, the
	compiler will need a matching core module named "t3x.t", in
	this case the file "targets/txdos86c.t" renamed as "t3x.t".

	Note that there will be lots of naming conflicts. The DOS and
	CP/M compilers all share names, and the core module of every
	compiler must be named "t3x.t". When installed, the Unix
	compiler driver "tx0" will take care of these details. On other
	systems it is up to you to create a workable solution.


	THE FREEBSD BACKEND

	There is a backend for FreeBSD which has some advantages and
	some disadvantages compared to the generic Unix backend.

	The greatest advantage is that is compiles to very compact
	*static* executables and does not depend on the C runtime
	library. The static T3X/0 compiler executable has a size of
	less than 40K bytes. It is smaller than the dynamic executable
	generated by the generic Unix backend.

	The greatest disadvantage is that there is no C runtime library
	to gloss over the internal differences between the various
	FreeBSD systems, so there is no guarantee that it will run on
	any system except for FreeBSD 12.4 (on which it has been tested).

	Then compile times are lightning fast, because no multi-megabyte
	C compiler behemoth has to be shoveled into memory. This might
	not be a big issue these days, but self-compiling T3X/0 in 0.17
	seconds on a 1000MHz system is pretty cool (0.31s using the
	generic Unix backend).

	However, the FreeBSD backend does not have the T3X.BREAK
	function for intercepting keyboard interrupts, because the
	emulation of signal() has become so bizarrely complicated
	in the recent years that I have just given up on it.

	To use the FreeBSD backend, change the value of HOST in Makefile
	to "fbsd" and then run

	    make clean; make; make fbsd-triple

	If it works, great! If it fails, use the generic Unix backend.

	You can use HOST=unix and the "install-fbsd-native" make target
	to install both the generic Unix backend and the FreeBSD backend.
	The Unix backend will be the default, but you can use

	    tx0 -t fbsd program

	to activate the FreeBSD code generator.

